$NetBSD: CHANGES-pkgsrc-2024Q2,v 1.1.2.9 2024/08/09 19:04:25 bsiegert Exp $

Changes to packages and infrastructure on the pkgsrc-2024Q2 branch:

Pullup ticket #6870 - requested by sborrill
Pullup ticket #6871 - requested by taca
www/squid6: security fix

Pullup ticket #6872 - requested by taca
www/firefox: security fix
www/firefox-l10n: dependent update

Pullup ticket #6874 - requested by wiz
security/openssh: security fix (RCE)

Pullup ticket #6875 - requested by taca
www/apache24: security fix

Pullup ticket #6876 - requested by taca
www/apache24: security fix

Pullup ticket #6877 - requested by gutteridge
www/firefox115: security fix
www/firefox115-l10n: dependent update

Pullup ticket #6873 - requested by taca
mail/thunderbird: security fix
mail/thunderbird-l10n: dependent update

Pullup ticket #6878 - requested by hauke
net/netatalk3: security fix

Pullup ticket #6879 - requested by wiz
www/apache24: security update

Pullup ticket #6880 - requested by taca
www/ruby-rack; security update

Pullup ticket #6881 - requested by taca
www/firefox: security update
www/firefox-l10n: dependency update

Pullup ticket #6882 - requested by taca
net/bind918: security update

Pullup ticket #6883 - requested by taca
lang/ruby32-base: security fix

Pullup ticket #6884 - requested by morr
editors/vim-share: security fix

Pullup ticket #6885 - requested by riastradh
filesystems/glusterfs: build fix -- Use @VARBASE@, @PREFIX@, &c., instead of
/var, /usr/pkg, &c., in the rc script

Pullup ticket #6886 - requested by nia
archivers/unzip: security fix

Pullup ticket #6887 - requested by nia
chat/znc: security fix

Pullup ticket #6888 - requested by nia
audio/opusfile: security fix

Pullup ticket #6889 - requested by gutteridge
www/firefox115: security fix
www/firefox115-l10n: dependent update

