$NetBSD: CHANGES-pkgsrc-2024Q1,v 1.1.2.10 2024/06/23 18:23:25 bsiegert Exp $

Changes to packages and infrastructure on the $BRANCH branch:

Pullup ticket #6841 - requested by wiz
www/p5-libwww: build fix

Pullup ticket #6842 - requested by bouyer
sysutils/xentools415: NetBSD 10 bugfix
sysutils/xentools418: NetBSD 10 bugfix

Pullup ticket #6843 - requested by taca
www/apache24: security fix

Pullup ticket #6844 - requested by taca
editors/abiword-plugins: build fix

Pullup ticket #6845 - requested by taca
www/php-concrete-cms: security fix

Pullup ticket #6847 - requested by taca
lang/php82: security fix

Pullup ticket #6848 - requested by taca
lang/php83: security fix

Pullup ticket #6849 - requested by taca
lang/php81: security fix

Pullup ticket #6846 - requested by bouyer
net/mirror: build fix

Pullup ticket #6850 - requested by gutteridge
www/firefox115: security fix
www/firefox115-l10n: dependent update

Pullup ticket #6851 - requested by taca
net/bind918: blocklist handling fix (PR bin/58170)

Pullup ticket #6852 - requested by taca
net/bind916: blocklist handling fix (PR bin/58170)

Pullup ticket #6855 - requested by gutteridge
www/firefox115: security fix
www/firefox115-lang: dependent update

Pullup tickets #6853 and #6854 - requested by morr
editors/vim: security fix

Pullup ticket #6856 - requested by riastradh
bsd.prefs.mk: Cygwin build fix

Pullup ticket #6857 - requested by taca
databases/phpldapadmin: security fix

Pullup ticket #6858 - requested by taca
lang/php83: security fix

Pullup ticket #6866 - requested by taca
lang/php83: security fix

Pullup ticket #6859 - requested by taca
www/ruby-rails70: security fix

Pullup ticket #6860 - requested by taca
www/ruby-rails71: security fix

Pullup ticket #6861 - requested by taca
www/ruby-rails61: security fix

Pullup ticket #6862 - requested by taca
mail/rspamd: NetBSD bugfix

Pullup ticket #6863 - requested by taca
devel/git: security fix

Pullup ticket #6864 - requested by taca
mail/roundcube: security fix

Pullup ticket #6869 - requested by gutteridge
www/firefox115: security fix
www/firefox115-l10n: dependent update

